[release-v2.1] [DOC] Update metrics generator doc and add best practices (#2569)
grafana/tempo: docs/sources/tempo/operations/best-practices.md

---
title: Best practices for traces
menuTitle: Best practices
description: Learn about the best practices for traces
weight: 20
---

# Best practices for traces

This page provides some general best practices for tracing.

## Span and resource attributes

> [Traces]({{< relref "../traces" >}}) are built from spans, which denote units of work such as a call to, or from, an upstream service. Spans are constructed primarily of span and resource attributes. 
> Spans also have a hierarchy, where parent spans can have children or siblings.

Author: ```suggestion
[Traces]({{< relref "../traces" >}}) are built from spans, which denote units of work such as a call to, or from, an upstream service. Spans are constructed primarily of span and resource attributes. 
Spans also have a hierarchy, where parent spans can have children or siblings. 

In the screenshot below, the left side of the screen (1) shows the list of results for the query. The right side (2) lists each span that makes up the selected trace. 
```

These can also include information on the libraries that were used to instrument the spans for a trace, or any other infrastructure information.

For more information, read the [Attribute and Resource](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/otel/overview/) sections in the OpenTelemetry specification.

### Naming conventions for span and resource attributes

When naming attributes, use consistent, nested namespaces to ensures that attribute keys are obvious to anyone observing the spans of a trace and that common attributes can be shared by spans.
Using our example from above, the `http` prefix of the attribute is the namespace, and `url` and `status_code` are keys within that namespace.
Attributes can also be nested, for example `http.url.protocol` might be `HTTP` or `HTTPS`, whereas `http.url.path` might be `/api/v1/query`.

For more details around semantic naming conventions, refer to the [Recommendations for OpenTelemetry Authors](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/otel/common/attribute-naming/#recommendations-for-opentelemetry-authors) documentation.

> Some third-party libraries already provide auto-instrumentation that generate span and span attributes when included in a source base.

Author: ```suggestion
Some third-party libraries provide auto-instrumentation that generate span and span attributes when included in a source base.
```

> This alleviates the need for you to add spans and attributes for calling those libraries.

Author: ```suggestion
```

For more information about instrumenting your app for tracing, refer to the [Instrument for distributed tracing](/docs/tempo/latest/getting-started/instrumentation/) documentation.

## Determining where to add spans

When instrumenting, determine the smallest piece of work that you need to observe in a trace to be of value to ensure that you don’t over (or under) instrument.

Creating a new span for any work that has a relatively significant duration allows the observation of a trace to immediately show where significant amounts of time are spent during the processing of a request into your application or system.

For example, adding a span for a call to another services (either instrumented or not) may take an unknown amount of time to complete, and therefore being able to separate this work shows when services are taking longer than expected.

Adding a span for a piece of work that might call many other functions in a loop is a good signal of how long that loop is taking (you might add a span attribute that counts how many time the loop runs to determine if the duration is acceptable).

> However, adding a span for each method or function call in that loop might not, as it might produce hundreds or thousands of spans that are essentially of no individual value.

Author: ```suggestion
However, adding a span for each method or function call in that loop might not, as it might produce hundreds or thousands of worthless spans.
```

## Tracing versus profiling

> 

Author: Maybe this section should really be on the What are traces? page or on the Getting started with Tempo page.

Reviewer: agree. this part could be dropped.

Author: Done. I've moved that section to the "What are traces" page and added two definitions. I'm also updating our main branch with the changes made to this backport.

---
title: Best practices for traces
menuTitle: Best practices
description: Learn about the best practices for traces
weight: 20
---

# Best practices for traces

This page provides some general best practices for tracing.

## Span and resource attributes

[Traces]({{< relref "../traces" >}}) are built from spans, which denote units of work such as a call to, or from, an upstream service. Spans are constructed primarily of span and resource attributes. 
Spans also have a hierarchy, where parent spans can have children or siblings. 

In the screenshot below, the left side of the screen (1) shows the list of results for the query. The right side (2) lists each span that makes up the selected trace. 

<p align="center"><img src="getting-started/assets/trace-explore-spans.png" alt="Trace example"></p>

A **span attribute** is a key/value pair that provides context for its span. For example, if the span deals with calling another service via HTTP, an attribute could include the HTTP URL (maybe as the span attribute key `http.url`) and the HTTP status code returned (as the span attribute `http.status_code`). Span attributes can consist of varying, non-null types.

> Unlike a span attribute, a **resource attribute** is a key/value pair that describes the context of how the span was collected.

Reviewer: Maybe add one sentence here to give more details.

... context of how the span was collected. Generally these attributes describe the process that created the span.

Author: ```suggestion
Unlike a span attribute, a **resource attribute** is a key/value pair that describes the context of how the span was collected. Generally, these attributes describe the process that created the span.
```

---
title: Best practices for traces
menuTitle: Best practices
description: Learn about the best practices for traces
weight: 20
---

# Best practices for traces

This page provides some general best practices for tracing.

## Span and resource attributes

> Traces are built from spans. Spans are constructed primarily of span and resource attributes.

Author: ```suggestion
Traces are built from spans. Spans are constructed primarily of span and resource attributes. For more information about traces, refer to [What are traces?]({{< relref "../traces" >}}).
```

> A **span attribute** is a key/value pair that exposes context for the span that it exists within. For example, if the span deals with calling another service via HTTP, it could include the HTTP URL (maybe as the span attribute key `http.url`) and the HTTP status code returned (as the span attribute `http.status_code`). Span attributes can consist of varying, non-null types.
> 
> Unlike a span attribute, a **resource attribute** is a key/value pair that is concerned around the context of the manner in which the span was collected.
> For example, this could a set of resource attributes concerning a Kubernetes cluster, in which case you may see resource attributes, for example: `k8s.namespace`, `k8s.container_name`, and `k8s.cluster`.
> These can also include information on the libraries that were used to instrument the spans for a trace, or any other infrastructure information.

Author: ```suggestion
A **span attribute** is a key/value pair that exposes context for the span that it exists within. For example, if the span deals with calling another service via HTTP, it could include the HTTP URL (maybe as the span attribute key `http.url`) and the HTTP status code returned (as the span attribute `http.status_code`). Span attributes can consist of varying, non-null types.

Unlike a span attribute, a **resource attribute** is a key/value pair that describes the context of the manner in which the span was collected.
For example, this could be a set of resource attributes concerning a Kubernetes cluster, in which case you may see resource attributes, for example: `k8s.namespace`, `k8s.container_name`, and `k8s.cluster`.
These can also include information on the libraries that were used to instrument the spans for a trace, or any other infrastructure information.
```

> For more information, read the [Attribute and Resource](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/specification/overview.md) sections in the OpenTelemetry specification.

Author: ```suggestion
For more information, read the [Attribute and Resource](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/otel/overview/) sections in the OpenTelemetry specification.
```

### Naming conventions for span and resource attributes

> When naming attributes, it is best to use consistent, nested namespaces.
> This ensures that attribute keys will be obvious to anyone observing the spans of a trace, and that common attributes can be shared by spans.
> Using our example from above, the `http` prefix of the attribute is the namespace, with `url` and `status_code` being keys within that namespace.
> These can also be nested, for example `http.url.protocol` might be `HTTP` or `HTTPS`, whereas `http.url.path` might be `/api/v1/query`.

Author: ```suggestion
When naming attributes, use consistent, nested namespaces to ensures that attribute keys are obvious to anyone observing the spans of a trace and that common attributes can be shared by spans.
Using our example from above, the `http` prefix of the attribute is the namespace, and `url` and `status_code` are keys within that namespace.
Attributes can also be nested, for example `http.url.protocol` might be `HTTP` or `HTTPS`, whereas `http.url.path` might be `/api/v1/query`.
```

> 

Author: Add a picture of a trace here with a DB trace denoting a unit of work

> There are more details around semantic naming conventions which should be followed at the following link: https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/otel/common/attribute-naming/#recommendations-for-opentelemetry-authors
> 
> Some third-party libraries already provide auto-instrumentation that generate span and span attributes when included in a source base.
> This alleviates the need for you to add spans and attributes for calling those libraries.
> 
> For more information about instrumenting your app for tracing, refer to the [Instrument for distributed tracing](/docs/tempo/latest/getting-started/instrumentation/) documentation.

Author: ```suggestion
For more details around semantic naming conventions, refer to the [Recommendations for OpenTelemetry Authors](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/otel/common/attribute-naming/#recommendations-for-opentelemetry-authors) documentation.

Some third-party libraries already provide auto-instrumentation that generate span and span attributes when included in a source base.
This alleviates the need for you to add spans and attributes for calling those libraries.

For more information about instrumenting your app for tracing, refer to the [Instrument for distributed tracing](/docs/tempo/latest/getting-started/instrumentation/) documentation.
```

## Determining where to add spans

> Spans make up a trace, where a trace is essentially just a meta ID that groups spans together.
> Spans themselves denote units of work. This could be something that carries out some work within a service, or it could be a call from, or to, another service that is upstream or downstream.
> Spans also have a hierarchy, where parent spans can have children or siblings.
> 
> When instrumenting, determine the smallest piece of work that you need to observe in a trace to be of value to ensure that you don’t over (or under) instrument.
> 
> In general, when manually instrumenting, create a new span for any work that has a relatively significant duration. This allows the observation of a trace to immediately show where significant amounts of time are spent during the processing of a request into your application or system.
> 
> For example, adding a span for a call to another services (either instrumented or not) may take an unknown amount of time to complete, and therefore being able to separate this work shows when services are taking longer than expected.
> 
> Adding a span for a piece of work that might call many other functions in a loop is a good signal of how long that loop is taking (you might add a span attribute that counts how many time the loop runs to determine if the duration is acceptable).
> However, adding a span for each method or function call in that loop might not, as it might produce hundreds or thousands of spans that are essentially of no individual value.

Author: ```suggestion
When instrumenting, determine the smallest piece of work that you need to observe in a trace to be of value to ensure that you don’t over (or under) instrument.

In general, when manually instrumenting, create a new span for any work that has a relatively significant duration. This allows the observation of a trace to immediately show where significant amounts of time are spent during the processing of a request into your application or system.

For example, adding a span for a call to another services (either instrumented or not) may take an unknown amount of time to complete, and therefore being able to separate this work shows when services are taking longer than expected.

Adding a span for a piece of work that might call many other functions in a loop is a good signal of how long that loop is taking (you might add a span attribute that counts how many time the loop runs to determine if the duration is acceptable).
However, adding a span for each method or function call in that loop might not, as it might produce hundreds or thousands of spans that are essentially of no individual value.
```

---
title: Best practices for traces
menuTitle: Best practices
description: Learn about the best practices for traces
weight: 20
---

# Best practices for traces

This page provides some general best practices for tracing.

> ## Span and resource attributes

Author: If this is a best practices doc, should it contain the introductory material about spans and resource attributes? I understand why it's here -- because the naming attributes builds upon the span and resource content. This material could probably be reduced, though. I'm tempted to do that. What do you think, @joe-elliott ?

Author: I edited the content down and refocused it a bit.

> Traces are built from spans. Spans are constructed primarily of span and resource attributes. 
> Spans themselves denote units of work. This could be something that carries out some work within a service, or it could be a call from, or to, another service that is upstream or downstream.
> Spans also have a hierarchy, where parent spans can have children or siblings.
> 
> For more information about traces, refer to [What are traces?]({{< relref "../traces" >}}).

Author: ```suggestion
[Traces]({{< relref "../traces" >}}) are built from spans, which denote units of work such as a call to, or from, an upstream service. Spans are constructed primarily of span and resource attributes. 
Spans also have a hierarchy, where parent spans can have children or siblings.

```

Using our example from above, the `http` prefix of the attribute is the namespace, and `url` and `status_code` are keys within that namespace.
Attributes can also be nested, for example `http.url.protocol` might be `HTTP` or `HTTPS`, whereas `http.url.path` might be `/api/v1/query`.

For more details around semantic naming conventions, refer to the [Recommendations for OpenTelemetry Authors](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/otel/common/attribute-naming/#recommendations-for-opentelemetry-authors) documentation.

Some third-party libraries already provide auto-instrumentation that generate span and span attributes when included in a source base.
This alleviates the need for you to add spans and attributes for calling those libraries.

For more information about instrumenting your app for tracing, refer to the [Instrument for distributed tracing](/docs/tempo/latest/getting-started/instrumentation/) documentation.

## Determining where to add spans

When instrumenting, determine the smallest piece of work that you need to observe in a trace to be of value to ensure that you don’t over (or under) instrument.

> When manually instrumenting, create a new span for any work that has a relatively significant duration. This allows the observation of a trace to immediately show where significant amounts of time are spent during the processing of a request into your application or system.

Author: ```suggestion
Creating a new span for any work that has a relatively significant duration allows the observation of a trace to immediately show where significant amounts of time are spent during the processing of a request into your application or system.
```
